Sedna Sedna or PYTHON Sedna is a large planetoid in the outer PYTHON of the Solar System that was 
as of at a distance of about astronomical units km PYTHON from the Sun about three times farther 
than Neptune PYTHON has PYTHON that Sedna s surface composition is similar to those of some other 
trans Neptunian objects being PYTHON a PYTHON of water methane and nitrogen ices with tholins Its 
surface is one of the reddest PYTHON Solar System objects It is a possible dwarf planet Sedna is 
approximately PYTHON with PYTHON and AW as the largest planetoid not known to have a moon For most 
of its orbit it is even farther from the Sun than at present with its aphelion estimated at AU 
times Neptune s distance or about of a light year making it one of the most distant known objects 
in the Solar System other than long period comets b c Sedna has an exceptionally long and 
elongated orbit taking approximately years to complete and a distant point of closest approach to 
the Sun at AU These facts have led to much speculation about its origin The Minor Planet Center 
currently places Sedna in the scattered disc a group of objects sent into highly elongated orbits 
by the gravitational influence of Neptune This classification has been contested because its 
perihelion is too large for it to have been scattered by a known planet leading some astronomers 
to informally refer to it as the first known member of the inner Oort cloud Others speculate that 
it might have been tugged into its current orbit by a passing star perhaps one within the Sun s 
birth cluster an open cluster or even that it was captured from another star system Another 
hypothesis suggests that its orbit may be evidence for a large planet beyond the orbit of Neptune 
Astronomer Michael E Brown co discoverer of Sedna and numerous other possible dwarf planets thinks 
that it is the most scientifically important trans Neptunian object found to date because 
understanding its unusual orbit is likely to yield valuable information about the origin and early 
evolution of the Solar System History Discovery Sedna provisionally designated VB was discovered 
by Michael Brown Caltech Chad Trujillo Gemini Observatory and David Rabinowitz Yale University on 
November The discovery formed part of a survey begun in with the Samuel Oschin telescope at 
Palomar Observatory near San Diego California using Yale s megapixel Palomar Quest camera On that 
day an object was observed to move by arcseconds over hours relative to stars which indicated that 
its distance was about AU Follow up observations were made in November December with the SMARTS 
telescope at Cerro Tololo Inter American Observatory in Chile the Tenagra IV telescope in Nogales 
Arizona and the Keck Observatory on Mauna Kea in Hawaii Combining those with precovery 
observations taken at the Samuel Oschin telescope in August and from the Near Earth Asteroid 
Tracking consortium in allowed accurate determination of its orbit The calculations showed that 
the object was moving along a distant highly eccentric orbit at a distance of AU from the Sun 
Precovery images have later been found in images of the Palomar Digitized Sky Survey dating back 
to September Naming Brown initially nicknamed Sedna The Flying Dutchman or Dutch after a legendary 
ghost ship because its slow movement had initially masked its presence from his team For an 
official name for the object Brown settled on Sedna a name from Inuit mythology which Brown chose 
partly because he mistakenly thought the Inuit were the closest polar culture to his home in 
Pasadena and partly because the name unlike Quaoar would be easily pronounceable On his website he 
wrote Our newly discovered object is the coldest most distant place known in the Solar System so 
we feel it is appropriate to name it in honor of Sedna the Inuit goddess of the sea who is thought 
to live at the bottom of the frigid Arctic Ocean Brown also suggested to the International 
Astronomical Union s IAU Minor Planet Center that any future objects discovered in Sedna s orbital 
region should also be named after entities in arctic mythologies The team made the name Sedna 
public before the object had been officially numbered Brian Marsden the head of the Minor Planet 
Center said that such an action was a violation of protocol and that some members of the IAU might 
vote against it No objection was raised to the name and no competing names were suggested The IAU 
s Committee on Small Body Nomenclature accepted the name in September and also considered that in 
similar cases of extraordinary interest it might in the future allow names to be announced before 
they were officially numbered The customary English spelling Sedna was popularized by Franz Boas 
The modern pronunciation in the region southern Baffin Island is Sanna with dn perhaps becoming nn 
over the years Orbit and rotation Sedna has the second longest orbital period of any known object 
in the Solar System of comparable size or larger c calculated at around years a Its orbit is 
extremely eccentric with an aphelion estimated at AU and a perihelion at about AU This perihelion 
was the largest of that of any known Solar System object until the discovery of VP At its aphelion 
Sedna orbits the Sun at a mere of Earth s orbital speed When Sedna was discovered it was AU from 
the Sun approaching perihelion and was the most distant object in the Solar System observed Sedna 
was later surpassed by Eris which was detected by the same survey near aphelion at AU The orbits 
of some long period comets extend farther than that of Sedna they are too dim to be discovered 
except when approaching perihelion in the inner Solar System Even as Sedna nears its perihelion in 
mid d the Sun would appear merely as an extremely bright star like pinpoint in its sky times 
brighter than a full moon on Earth for comparison the Sun appears from Earth to be roughly times 
brighter than the full Moon and too far away to be visible as a disc to the naked eye When first 
discovered Sedna was thought to have an unusually long rotational period to days It was initially 
speculated that Sedna s rotation was slowed by the gravitational pull of a large binary companion 
similar to Pluto s moon Charon A search for such a satellite by the Hubble Space Telescope in 
March found nothing e and subsequent measurements from the MMT telescope suggest a much shorter 
rotation period of about hours more typical for a body of its size Physical characteristics Sedna 
has a V band absolute magnitude H of about and it is estimated to have an albedo of about thus 
giving it a diameter of approximately km At the time of its discovery it was the intrinsically 
brightest object found in the Solar System since Pluto in In the discoverers placed an upper limit 
of km on its diameter but by this was revised downward to less than km after observation by the 
Spitzer Space Telescope In measurements from the Herschel Space Observatory suggested that Sedna s 
diameter was km which would make it smaller than Pluto s moon Charon Because Sedna has no known 
moons determining its mass is currently impossible without sending a space probe Sedna is 
currently the largest trans Neptunian Sun orbiting object not known to have a satellite Only a 
single attempt has been made to find a satellite and it has been suggested that there is a chance 
of up to that a satellite could have been missed Observations from the SMARTS telescope show that 
in visible light Sedna is one of the reddest objects in the Solar System nearly as red as Mars 
Chad Trujillo and his colleagues suggest that Sedna s dark red colour is caused by a surface 
coating of hydrocarbon sludge or tholin formed from simpler organic compounds after long exposure 
to ultraviolet radiation Its surface is homogeneous in colour and spectrum this may be because 
Sedna unlike objects nearer the Sun is rarely impacted by other bodies which would expose bright 
patches of fresh icy material like that on Asbolus Sedna and two other very distant objects SQ and 
OO share their color with outer classical Kuiper belt objects and the centaur Pholus suggesting a 
similar region of origin Trujillo and colleagues have placed upper limits in Sedna s surface 
composition of for methane ice and for water ice The presence of methane further supports the 
existence of tholins on Sedna s surface because they are produced by irradiation of methane 
Barucci and colleagues compared Sedna s spectrum with that of Triton and detected weak absorption 
bands belonging to methane and nitrogen ices From these observations they suggested the following 
model of the surface Triton type tholins amorphous carbon nitrogen ices methanol and methane The 
detection of methane and water ices was confirmed in by the Spitzer Space Telescope mid infrared 
photometry The presence of nitrogen on the surface suggests the possibility that at least for a 
short time Sedna may have a tenuous atmosphere During a year period near perihelion the maximum 
temperature on Sedna should exceed K C the transition temperature between alpha phase solid N and 
the beta phase seen on Triton At K the N vapor pressure would be microbar Pa or atm Its deep red 
spectral slope is indicative of high concentrations of organic material on its surface and its 
weak methane absorption bands indicate that methane on Sedna s surface is ancient rather than 
freshly deposited This means that Sedna is too cold for methane to evaporate from its surface and 
then fall back as snow which happens on Triton and probably on Pluto Models of internal heating 
via radioactive decay suggest that Sedna might be capable of supporting a subsurface ocean of 
liquid water Origin In their paper announcing the discovery of Sedna Mike Brown and his colleagues 
described it as the first observed body belonging to the Oort cloud the hypothetical cloud of 
comets thought to exist nearly a light year from the Sun They observed that unlike scattered disc 
objects such as Eris Sedna s perihelion AU is too distant for it to have been scattered by the 
gravitational influence of Neptune Because it is a great deal closer to the Sun than was expected 
for an Oort cloud object and has an inclination roughly in line with the planets and the Kuiper 
belt they described the planetoid as being an inner Oort cloud object situated in the disc 
reaching from the Kuiper belt to the spherical part of the cloud If Sedna formed in its current 
location the Sun s original protoplanetary disc must have extended as far as AU into space Also 
Sedna s initial orbit must have been approximately circular otherwise its formation by the 
accretion of smaller bodies into a whole would not have been possible because the large relative 
velocities between planetesimals would have been too disruptive Therefore it must have been tugged 
into its current eccentric orbit by a gravitational interaction with another body In their initial 
paper Brown Rabinowitz and colleagues suggested three possible candidates for the perturbing body 
an unseen planet beyond the Kuiper belt a single passing star or one of the young stars embedded 
with the Sun in the stellar cluster in which it formed Mike Brown and his team favored the 
hypothesis that Sedna was lifted into its current orbit by a star from the Sun s birth cluster 
arguing that Sedna s aphelion of about AU which is relatively close compared to those of long 
period comets is not distant enough to be affected by passing stars at their current distances 
from the Sun They propose that Sedna s orbit is best explained by the Sun having formed in an open 
cluster of several stars that gradually disassociated over time That hypothesis has also been 
advanced by both Alessandro Morbidelli and Scott Jay Kenyon Computer simulations by Julio A 
Fernandez and Adrian Brunini suggest that multiple close passes by young stars in such a cluster 
would pull many objects into Sedna like orbits A study by Morbidelli and Levison suggested that 
the most likely explanation for Sedna s orbit was that it had been perturbed by a close 
approximately AU pass by another star in the first million years or so of the Solar System s 
existence The trans Neptunian planet hypothesis has been advanced in several forms by a number of 
astronomers including Rodney Gomes and Patryk Lykawka One scenario involves perturbations of Sedna 
s orbit by a hypothetical planetary sized body in the Hills cloud Recent simulations show that 
Sedna s orbital traits could be explained by perturbations by a Neptune mass object at AU or less 
a Jupiter mass MJ object at AU or even an Earth mass object at AU Computer simulations by Patryk 
Lykawka have suggested that Sedna s orbit may have been caused by a body roughly the size of Earth 
ejected outward by Neptune early in the Solar System s formation and currently in an elongated 
orbit between and AU from the Sun Mike Brown s various sky surveys have not detected any Earth 
sized objects out to a distance of about AU It is possible that such an object may have been 
scattered out of the Solar System after the formation of the inner Oort cloud Caltech researchers 
Konstantin Batygin and Mike Brown have hypothesised the existence of a giant planet in the outer 
Solar System nicknamed Planet Nine The planet would be about times as massive as Earth It would 
have a highly eccentric orbit and its average distance from the Sun would be about times that of 
Neptune which orbits at an average distance of astronomical units km Its orbital period would be 
to years The planet s existence was hypothesised using mathematical modeling and computer 
simulations but it has not been observed directly It may explain the orbits of a group of objects 
that includes Sedna It has been suggested that Sedna s orbit is the result of influence by a large 
binary companion to the Sun thousands of AU distant One such hypothetical companion is Nemesis a 
dim companion to the Sun that has been proposed to be responsible for the supposed periodicity of 
mass extinctions on Earth from cometary impacts the lunar impact record and the common orbital 
elements of a number of long period comets No direct evidence of Nemesis has been found and many 
lines of evidence such as crater counts have thrown its existence into doubt John J Matese and 
Daniel P Whitmire longtime proponents of the possibility of a wide binary companion to the Sun 
have suggested that an object of MJ lying at roughly AU from the Sun could produce a body in Sedna 
s orbit Morbidelli and Kenyon have also suggested that Sedna did not originate in the Solar System 
but was captured by the Sun from a passing extrasolar planetary system specifically that of a 
brown dwarf about th the mass of the Sun M or a main sequence star percent more massive than our 
Sun which owing to its larger mass may now be a white dwarf In either case the stellar encounter 
had likely occurred early after the Sun s formation about less than million years after the Sun 
had formed Stellar encounters during this time would have minimal effect on the Oort cloud s final 
mass and population since the Sun had excess material for replenishing the Oort cloud population 
Population Sedna s highly elliptical orbit means that the probability of its detection was roughly 
in which suggests that unless its discovery was a fluke another Sedna sized objects would exist 
within the same region Another object CR has a similar but less extreme orbit it has a perihelion 
of AU an aphelion of AU and an orbital period of years It may have been affected by the same 
processes as Sedna Each of the proposed mechanisms for Sedna s extreme orbit would leave a 
distinct mark on the structure and dynamics of any wider population If a trans Neptunian planet 
was responsible all such objects would share roughly the same perihelion about AU If Sedna were 
captured from another planetary system that rotated in the same direction as the Solar System then 
all of its population would have orbits on relatively low inclinations and have semi major axes 
ranging from to AU If it rotated in the opposite direction then two populations would form one 
with low and one with high inclinations The perturbations from passing stars would produce a wide 
variety of perihelia and inclinations each dependent on the number and angle of such encounters 
Acquiring a larger sample of such objects would help in determining which scenario is most likely 
I call Sedna a fossil record of the earliest Solar System said Brown in Eventually when other 
fossil records are found Sedna will help tell us how the Sun formed and the number of stars that 
were close to the Sun when it formed A survey by Brown Rabinowitz and Megan Schwamb attempted to 
locate another member of Sedna s hypothetical population Although the survey was sensitive to 
movement out to AU and discovered the likely dwarf planet Gonggong it detected no new sednoid 
Subsequent simulations incorporating the new data suggested about Sedna sized objects probably 
exist in this region with the brightest being about Eris s magnitude In Chad Trujillo and Scott 
Sheppard announced the discovery of VP an object half the size of Sedna in a year orbit similar to 
Sedna s and a perihelion within Sedna s range of roughly AU which led some to speculate that it 
offered evidence of a trans Neptunian planet Another high perihelion trans Neptunian object was 
announced by Sheppard and colleagues in provisionally designated TG and now named Lele k honua 
With a perihelion of AU and an even more distant orbit of years its longitude of perihelion the 
location where it makes its closest approach to the Sun appears to be aligned in the directions of 
both Sedna and VP strengthening the case for an apparent orbital clustering of trans Neptunian 
objects suspected to be influenced by a hypothetical distant planet dubbed Planet Nine In a study 
detailing Sedna s population and Lele k honua s orbital dynamics Sheppard concluded that the 
discovery implies a population of about million inner Oort Cloud objects larger than km with a 
total mass in the range of kg several times the mass of the asteroid belt and the mass of Pluto 
Classification The Minor Planet Center which officially catalogs the objects in the Solar System 
classifies Sedna as a scattered object This grouping is heavily questioned and many astronomers 
have suggested that it together with a few other objects e g CR be placed in a new category of 
distant objects named extended scattered disc objects E SDO detached objects distant detached 
objects DDO or scattered extended in the formal classification by the Deep Ecliptic Survey The 
discovery of Sedna resurrected the question of which astronomical objects should be considered 
planets and which should not On March articles on Sedna in the popular press reported that a tenth 
planet had been discovered This question was answered under the International Astronomical Union 
definition of a planet adopted on August which mandated that a planet must have cleared the 
neighborhood around its orbit Sedna has a Stern Levison parameter estimated to be much less than f 
and therefore cannot be considered to have cleared the neighborhood even though no other objects 
have yet been discovered in its vicinity To be a dwarf planet Sedna must be in hydrostatic 
equilibrium It is bright enough and therefore large enough that this is expected to be the case 
and several astronomers have called it one Exploration Sedna will come to perihelion around July d 
This close approach to the Sun provides an opportunity for study that will not occur again for 
years Although Sedna is listed on NASA s Solar System exploration website NASA is not known to be 
considering any type of mission at this time It was calculated that a flyby mission to Sedna could 
take years using a Jupiter gravity assist based on launch dates of May or June Sedna would be or 
AU from the Sun when the spacecraft arrived near the end of or respectively In May astrophysicist 
Ethan Siegel publicly advocated for a space probe mission to study Sedna as it approaches 
perihelion Siegel characterized Sedna as an attractive target due to its status as a possible 
inner Oort cloud object Because of Sedna s long orbital period we will not get the opportunity to 
study it this close to the Sun for many millennia again Such a mission could be facilitated by 
Dual Stage Grid ion thrusters that might cut cruise times considerably if powered for example by a 
